Cardiff Carnival 25th Anniversary Project.
Interviewer Steve Fletcher.
Venue Swicker Office.
Date?
October 17th 2014.
Interviewee June Campbell-Davies.
June, could you spell your full name for the record please?
J-U-N-E C-A-M-P-B-E-L-L-D-A-V-I-E-S.
Thanks June.
Well, opening shot, could you explain how you first became or experienced Carnival in the UK?
Okay, when I was quite young, maybe sort of 15, 16 years old, my dad used to take me and my sister to Carnival, Notting Hill Carnival.
In London, and it's such a massive event, and we just basically used to go down and just stand on the side and watch the Carnival floats, listen to the steel pan.
And then he would just say, well let's go along and we'll find a favourite group and we'll just tag along behind.
There'll be hundreds of people and we would just sort of, they call it chipping where you just kind of have this little miniature sort of jog walk with the band that you're following.
And it was usually really loud, your eardrums would be ringing for days afterwards.
But that was brilliant because you just go for miles and miles on end and you'd be tired, you'd have a stitch and your feet are hurting but you still keep going.
And I think we did this for a couple of years and I'd be, every year, as soon as school finished, I'd be thinking, can't wait to get to Carnival.
So that was my first experience and it's never left me.
And obviously when I moved to Cardiff, there wasn't any sort of Carnival as such until one year I saw, I was in town shopping and I heard this drumming from somewhere.
And I just saw this sort of like loads of people dressed up in the costumes I can think of.
All I can remember now is like whites and blues in blocks and just traveling, dancing down St. Mary Street.
I just couldn't get over it.
And that was my first image of...
I think you were an innocent bystander who saw the very first Cardiff Mars Carnival in 1990.
That was a traditional sailor Mars influenced by tradition from Trinidad.
And then a number of years later, you got involved in the Carnival for the first time.
Tell us more.
I had my daughter, she was about five then, and I used to go to dance classes at Rubicon in Splott and Jane Bellamy and Sally Verrell used to do a lot of community projects.
And they happened to mention that they are being involved in this Carnival.
And I thought, great, because I'd seen...
I've always missed it because I think me because I was going to Notting Hill, so I was never around when the Carnival was happening in Cardiff.
So I thought, well, you know, this will be great.
So it would be great to get feel involved because they said, anyone, you don't have to pay.
I couldn't get over you didn't have to pay.
You just turn up.
Everything was free and people would help you make costumes.
And I thought, wow, this is brilliant.
So they told us to go along to Cattay's Terrace Community Center and went along.
And that was it was it just blew my mind when we walked in because they happened to be everything happened to be people making costumes.
They had drummers on one side.
There was a little area where people would dance.
And I used to think, well, where are they going to do the dance?
Because there's no space.
But somehow they managed to clear the space and people learned to dance.
And Jane was leading some of the dance sequences.
And we didn't really know what group we were going to involve, but we just came along and we would just help making something.
And I just really was just trying to get feel involved.
And it didn't take very long to start a conversation talking to people, complete strangers.
That was I found quite amazing because it's quite daunting when you walk into a place and you don't know where to go.
I do I do remember a lady called Shona who had this amazing dreadlocks, blonde dreadlocks and sort of toolkit and just kind of like a little
toolkit and just coming up with a really lovely friendly face coming up and saying, oh, you know, what would you like to do?
Oh, we need this. And I'm just just helping.
And I was just gobsmacked.
But that was my that's my and my daughter's first experience.
And we the procession was quite a short procession, but it was just brilliant anyway, because what I didn't realize was that the drummers were going to be drumming as well.
I don't know why. You just don't connect everything together.
You just sort of hell bent on making what you make and make make making friends.
And then on the day when everyone gets kitted out and you line up and then you start parading through the streets.
And that was fantastic. And then we ended up on the museum stairs and there's all these lights and sound and just seeing the general public behind this barricade, which was I don't know how thick it was.
It was like maybe 10 rows thick.
And that was just amazing. And we were on a real high and feel just loved it.
We just couldn't wait when it was over. It was like we want more.
So obviously his daughter, Fionn, grew up with the Carly Carnival.
What sort of impact do you think it's had on her in her younger days?
And can you trace through to her more recent professional development?
Well, well, she just loved it because we were able to take one of the little headdresses.
It was like from that that particular card, we kind of it was like some sort of purple sparkly and kids like sparkly stuff.
We have to take the mask home or something.
And she was playing with a lot at home.
And I do remember her not being it can't can't wait for the next year.
And she would be really she wasn't always a hyper, but she's quite quiet child.
But at school, she said, Oh, mom, the kids keep telling me I'm mad because, you know, I'm just like, I do all sorts of strange things, whatever that was dancing around or whatever.
And she said, if only they did carnival, they'd understand.
And I was like, I was like, oh, my gosh, she really does.
She really does like it. I mean, the thing is, at home when we put music on and she'd be dancing and dressing up.
And that's the I think the thing for young kids that they can express themselves.
And, you know, we dance a lot at home and everything, but dressing up and putting on and making designing, what have you.
So every year we had to go religiously for carnival.
We would try and find out when it was happening and we would go down and we'd learn the dances.
And she would she just had enormous energy.
I think when most kids will probably stop and cry and they're tired, she'd just keep going.
She's a bit like a sort of Duracell batch.
You just keep going.
And so, yeah, every year she's probably she's got involved.
And the last couple of years, she's she's worked with Swicker helping out on the team and she has an interest in art.
So that kind of naturally sort of fell into place.
So, you know, with the advice of other artists just helping, she was able to kind of just get an idea of making stuff and putting that together,
helping other people put her own artistic input as well.
So it's been a real it's been a real she really looks forward to it.
She gets a lot out of it.
She didn't I think when she left to go away to train for three years in London and she came back, she and she got involved again.
She's thought, God, I really miss this.
I'd really missed and value how important it is to be creative in that way.
So I thought, oh, that's good.
What's wonderful is she falls in those bracket of people who originally had contact with Cardiff Carnival as community participants.
Yes. And now they're part of the professional team who help animate and inspire.
Yeah. Of course, your role has been primarily about movement.
But we know you can wield a glue gun like a man.
Yes, you learn. That's it. You learn as you go along.
I must admit the early days I was just coming in just to kind of, you know, get high, dance on the street, make your costume and have a good good burst of energy.
I remember there was one dancer and I'm wondering if it was a carnival that was maybe it was a carnival.
It was some event in Channel View.
It's a lady called Jenny Barbieri and they had Zamba Gala's playing and she managed to get a whole lot of dancers, professional dancers.
This would be a Zamba Dome event.
Was that what it was?
Yeah, absolutely. Yeah, I remember.
And that was amazing because we kind of filled, the whole place was filled in Channel View.
But she managed to get all these costumes together.
And I think she went to Sari shops and kind of got this fabric and billowed out these, you know, these, these, I don't know what kind of dancers we were.
I don't know if we were Bayana. I don't know what kind of.
But it was fantastic.
And that was another memorable moment.
Fiona wasn't born at, I don't know, Fiona wasn't around at that time, but I remember thinking this is really great.
We didn't take to the streets with that, but that was indoor.
And that was fabulous.
Of course, I mean, whole generations of Cardiff Carnival revelers and participants have to thank you for personally releasing their inner dancer,
inspiring and encouraging them and getting people to move.
Even the classic, Oh, I can't do that.
People, I've seen you.
Well, as you say, it's all about the arts of transformation.
But on top of all the movement, of course, there is the costumes and the rest of it.
Given your long 18 year history of association with the Cardiff Carnival,
do you have some memorable standout costumes that you've played that have meant something special for you whilst performing on parade?
There there's a few. Let's see now.
There was one year where it was called Mask, I think the Mask, Mask, Harade.
And we we all had to design sort of masks of some sort.
And I remember who was working alongside me.
We had Melissa, because she's very good at Zamba dancing.
And there were some really nice designs.
And there was one that was a bit like sort of burlesque, but with sort of Victorian flouncy sort of skirts.
And and we had a lot of people actually get involved.
So you didn't have time to work on your own costume.
But I remember thinking, God, I'd really like to kind of I really like a costume like that.
So while we're there busy helping other people get stuff together and and you know, by the third week, you still have to get sequins on and more feathers and more.
I just thought I'll never get my costume together.
But I remember I had something at home, an old skirt that I had.
And I thought, right, I'm going to design my own little kind of damn Lorraine character.
And it was this old lady.
The only thing I could make, we had time to make was our masks.
So we had a little half face mask and feathers.
And I had this damn Lorraine character and I sort of stuffed at my bottom with huge buttocks so that my Victorian green and black dress could hang outside.
I thought, right, I'm going to be an old lady.
And it was a year that we had this sort of dragon feature.
We had this massive red dragon leading the parade.
And and I was just normally I run up and down and help out, get people zip tied and what have you.
And I thought, no, I really need to let us team.
And I paraded up and down in character.
I still help people get in and out of their costumes and develop art.
But I remember thinking, I'm going to stay in this old character.
Let's see how long I can stay in this old character.
And because I noticed a lot of people bystanders are watching and they were really serious.
They were didn't seem to be enjoying.
I thought, this is ridiculous. This is a colorful event.
It's not raining. It's brilliant.
And we've got people maybe they don't understand what it's about.
So I had gone up to a few people who were serious and kind of waved my umbrella at them and then wiggled my bum.
And it's only when I wiggled my bum that I managed to get a smile out of them.
So and that was that was fantastic.
Yeah. Another memorable costume was well, we didn't have much of a costume actually.
But it was a memorable event was being part of the Blue Devils.
We had a guy called Spooky had come over and he said that this is some kind of thing where everyone gets painted blue.
And they have some rope tied around their waist and you've got some sort of devil wings.
And there was a particular drum beat and you would again it was it was a way of suddenly you became a different character.
Not you know, you just suddenly you're somebody else and you could be as impish and just wicked and devilish as you want.
Or you could you could just be really nice and you there was an opportunity to go up and beg for money.
But we didn't do that. But unfortunately, some of the kids did that.
They enjoyed it. I think it's quite close to sort of Halloween where they can let you know trick or treat.
And if they didn't pay you, if they didn't pay and then they would get splattered with blue water.
But that what was interesting about that one was that you realize you had such power.
People were absolutely freaked out by you if you looked at them, if you just looked and they didn't want to look at you.
And I remember that was quite that was quite a memorable experience.
Unfortunately, it rained as well. So but it didn't stop us.
We just continue to, you know, go and do what we did.
I know that for my costume, I had the first time I wore a kind of corset and I had to use some blue material to kind of emphasize the your derriere backside.
And I had some really nice high cut knee boots.
Unfortunately, my heel broken one of them. So I had one heel.
So I felt like a sort of semi goat. So that's that's why a memorable and another memorable one.
And another carnival much earlier, probably 2000.
And I don't know what it's to do with the citizenship.
I think it's 2002 and that was working with Jane Bellamy.
And we had to to the backpacks were like two blocks of flats.
It kind of it kind of went up in a kind of semi pyramid.
And and it was also a bit kind of awkward to dance with.
But it was quite memorable because it could have stood out.
I remember remembering looking at photographs, it stood out from all the rest of what was being made that these tower blocks.
I'm not even sure if it's to do with nine and low.
And I don't know. But anyway, I remember that being quite memorable.
And the choreography, because Jane was very good at kind of, you know, getting things to change direction and getting people to cross over,
which sometimes isn't easy when you got people who involved in the dance and who haven't had much dance ability,
but she kind of persevered. And that was interesting also because we were working somewhere down in the down in the bay.
There was supposed to be the old Casablanca used to be.
There was a building there that we kind of rehearsed in there.
And it was the first time we had a really nice dance space with two levels.
So it's kind of memorable and special, memorable again, because we had I'm going off the tangent here.
I remember one girl falling off off the railing somehow and got impaled.
There was quite it was that was the only sad bit of the whole thing.
We just thought what a wonderful place.
And then we and we couldn't work there again, I suppose we didn't, you know.
But yeah, those kind of three that really stood out as obviously the vast majority of our audience while we're praying,
enjoy, appreciate and even applaud.
But back in the mid 90s, you had a very unpleasant experience in public, but which I hasten to add,
I think you brought to well, a certain amount of natural justice was served.
Would you care to tell us more about that?
I was again dancing.
I was actually wasn't actually working part of I was like a participant coming in dancing with Jane Bellamy's group.
Can't remember how costumed as such.
And I was with another mother, Marion.
I don't think feeling was feeling wasn't around then at all, actually.
But Marion and both of both of us were in this section dancing and we were parading through a number of different places.
In this section dancing and we were parading through a new part of Cardiff.
I remember where we have the the market and where you have the stairs that goes up into Argos.
That was kind of fairly new.
So we were parading around there and that's an area where we stood for a bit.
And also the pedestrian could they could stand up on the stairs and look down as we were passing through.
And we noticed there was one guy we had whistles.
We could blow whistles and make our own little sort of our own sound as we went along.
We noticed one guy had come in from the crowd into the group.
And we were a bit annoyed because we're doing the choreography and he was getting in the way.
But we didn't we just thought, oh, maybe he'll just surpass us and go off.
But he didn't. He just kept he was just there kind of hanging about.
And I just remember blowing the whistle, a particular rhythm or whatever it was.
And he just turned around, said something quite racist, spat at me,
which really threw me because I wasn't expecting it, spat at Marion as well.
And then he just he just ran off.
Now, the thing is, I was so I mean, I did have a small bag with me.
And I'm really glad that I had, you know, I had a little kind of I don't know what it was.
It wasn't special brew. I did have a little drink just to help me along the way, you know,
with as I was dancing, as you do.
So I was a little bit merry as well as shocked at the same time.
I was really annoyed. I thought, I'm not going to have this guy getting over this.
So I very quickly looked around to see if there was any cameras around.
And then I just charged off to try and chase him as he went through the car.
And I kicked him up the backside and ran back, hoping that he wasn't going to wasn't going to find me.
So it was a bit of a cat and mouse kind of thing going on.
But I was so miffed because I thought this has never happened before.
And we did report him to the stewards.
And we looked to see where he'd gone because there's a lot of people.
He'd gone up the stairs and we'd seen that he'd changed from what he was wearing into something else.
He put a jacket on or something.
I don't think they I think they must have questioned him, whatever.
But by that time we had to carry on.
But that was the most unpleasant thing. That's never we never had any racist anything.
Racist happened to us or abuse or anything.
But that was that was a bit that moment there was a little bit worrying because I wasn't sure what he was going to do.
I'm sure I must have swore back at him in shock and horror.
But I'm glad I gave him a kick.
I just think it's fabulous that you had the last word kicked about the bum.
Oh, I that that made me feel better.
I'm not sure if I hadn't had that lager.
I don't know what I would have done. I probably wouldn't have done that.
It's not what one should do.
As somebody who's had contact with the carnival, both as participants and as the most fabulous colleague and choreographer and dance tutor,
for we reckon that you've had contact with 18 years of Cardiff Carnival, which makes you a carnival hero.
If you had any thoughts about the future or the importance of Cardiff Carnival, would you care to share them with us just to end the interview?
Yeah.
What's it all about? Where's it going? Why are we here?
Do you know, I think I think what them know, as I've seen carnival over the years in Cardiff and I think what's really
magical about it, apart from when we go out on the street and you actually see the work that's gone into what people have made,
I think it's really important. It just brings people together.
And I think that's it's amazing what it does. Just the fact you come in and you make you make you you help make other people's costumes or you help make your own.
And you can talk to somebody who you've never met before.
I think it's really great at breaking down barriers.
Some people, a lot of people still, you know, maybe at home they don't do anything.
They might be out of work, they might be disabled, they can't get out.
And it really brings people out. And I think it's fantastic that it's free.
I think people still don't realize that it's free, even though we get all the leaflets out.
They're still amazed. People still forget sometimes that it's on this particular day, because when they see it and you see their faces, it's like they are, you know, they're in awe of it all.
And it's changed from I remember from the very beginning, it was a bit more I wouldn't say the costumes.
They were a bit more, I suppose, creative in a sense that you might have an idea and so that it might slightly veer off a little bit.
So there was room for creative experiment. I think now we're looking at more detail.
So in a way, as well as it looking beautiful and polished and exquisitely made, there's detail in there and people are learning.
I think people are learning more from the skills of making something, maybe much more than they did earlier on.
I think I didn't when I first participated. It was a case of just stick it whatever on.
But now I'm thinking, right, if I had to go and do this and I wasn't involved in Cardiff, I think I can remember how to make a template.
And so there's some sort of skills that are being passed down and around.
I think what is really still difficult is getting people from different areas of Cardiff to come into one area to participate.
So, you know, you won't be from Adamstown or from Ely or they're still really difficult.
And I don't that's because that's what Cardiff's like.
So but I think it's I think it's a really important thing that has to keep going.
Even with all the cuts, I think Carnival is one way of getting people together of all different age groups.
It's something that makes people feel proud of their city, whether it's raining, snowing or whatever.
That galvanizes people onto the streets.
They come together for a special moment.
And and again, for those who have been with the car on and off, who've maybe been in the early days and come back later on, it's a bit like Christmas.
You don't see people for a long time.
And it's that once a year we all gather together and celebrate, celebrate life, celebrate, catch upon what people are doing.
And I think I think it's amazing that it's just keeps going and it keeps evolving.
And I think things do have to evolve.
I don't know which way.
Hopefully it will still happen.
But I think it's it's it's it's fantastic.
June Campbell Davis, I repeat, you are a carnival hero and many, many thanks for the interview.
And thank you.